Do you have kids?
Maybe you have nieces or nephews?
Or do you work in a school environment?
Maybe it's just friends who know your programmer and ask about how they should go about introducing
programming concepts to their kids.
Anna-Lena Popkes is back on the show to share her research on when and how to teach kids
programming.
We spend the second half of this episode talking about concrete apps and toys you might consider
for each age group.
Plus, some of these are fun for adults too.
This is Talk Python to Me, episode 478, recorded August 8th, 2024.
Are you ready for your host, please?
You're listening to Michael Kennedy on Talk Python to Me.
Live from Portland, Oregon, and this segment was made with Python.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython,
both accounts over at fosstodon.org.
And keep up with the show and listen to over nine years of episodes at talkpython.fm.
If you want to be part of our live episodes, you can find the live streams over on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube and get notified about upcoming shows.
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS.
If you're building a B2B SaaS app, at some point, your customers will start asking for
enterprise features like SAML authentication, SCIM provisioning, audit logs, and fine-grained
authorization.
WorkOS helps ship enterprise features on day one without slowing down your core product
development.
Find out more at talkpython.fm/workos.
And it's brought to you by us over at Talk Python Training.
Did you know that we have over 270 hours of Python courses?
Yeah, that's right.
Check them out at talkpython.fm/courses.
Anna Lena, welcome back to Talk Python to me.
It's awesome to have you here.
Yeah, thanks for having me again.
Yeah, it's always fun to have you on.
You've got interesting and playful topics.
I think the very first time that you were on the show, I can't remember how many years
ago, but it's been a little while, was to talk about learning Python through Harry Potter.
Is that right?
In the magical universe.
Yeah.
I still love that project a lot.
People can find that on GitHub and they obviously can find that episode on talkpython.fm.
But we're back for, I would say, another playful episode in a sense, right?
Continuing the theme, I'm going to talk about when should you teach kids to program and
maybe even more importantly, what are some age appropriate resources that spans a good
chunk of what a kid's life is?
You know, like a kid, not a kid at 18, I don't know, but lower than that, a lot of resources.
Exactly.
So that's going to be a lot of fun.
It has been a while since you've been on the show though.
So just a quick introduction about who you are and what you do for everyone listening.
Yeah, actually not much has changed since the last episode.
I think that was on Python packaging.
I'm still a senior machine learning engineer at a German company called Innovex, where
I jump from project to project.
I'm currently working at the speech recognition team at Bubble still.
Was that last time as well?
I'm not sure.
I think so.
I believe so.
Yes.
Yeah.
So that's a really interesting topic.
And yeah, I love Python.
We have talked about different topics over the years and this time it's on children and
talk I prepared for PyData and the PyCon here in Germany.
And I was really, it was lots of fun to learn about it.
Yeah.
It looks like you did a lot of research.
I did.
I think it's probably worth pointing out that we both are parents.
And so we have some interest in this topics, you know, close to home as well.
My kids are getting a little bit older for any of this kind of guidance, but still, you
know, a lot of things I thought about as they were growing up and some of these things we're
going to talk about I've actually used, you know, before I saw them on your list as well,
which is cool, but yeah, it's a personal topic, I suppose.
Yeah, absolutely.
For me, it's also personal because I did not have any coding opportunities growing up myself.
I really want this to be different for children growing up now and my own kids.
That's also a reason why I wanted to do the research so that it would be just different.
Let me know what you think.
I feel like there are social stigmas, like this person should be a coder and that person
shouldn't be a coder.
They should go do something else.
And that may or may not be around gender, but often it is, unfortunately.
But when you're six years old, you don't care.
You like games.
You want to play a game.
You want to explore.
Things are interesting.
Right.
And that also has a big opportunity to short circuit these unnecessary influences, I guess,
depending on different cultures.
And also just having it in your environment.
If there's like a person in your family or your friend circle or even at school and you
have some opportunity to learn about it, it helps a lot.
For me, it just wasn't a topic ever.
And I still remember my parents when I told them that I was switched to computer science
in my graduate degree.
They were like, "Are you sure you want to do that?
Isn't that like very nerdy, techie stuff?"
And I'm so happy I did the switch, even though it was quite hard in the beginning.
But it's an amazing topic and there's so much cool stuff to do.
It's just not only the nerdy stuff.
It's always got something new.
That's both the benefit and the curse of it.
What you've learned is powerful and helpful, but there's more to learn.
Yeah, always.
But that makes, like, keeps it interesting.
Right.
You never get bored.
Exactly.
Especially in JavaScript.
Okay.
So I feel like as your parents had that thought, you know, probably one thing they may have
thought, I don't know, obviously I don't know them, but a lot of people would think is that's
a very antisocial sort of thing, right?
Like, "Oh, you're going into programming.
That means you're going to sit behind a computer screen completely alone and not talk to people."
And I think that's one of the misconceptions of programming.
Yeah, absolutely.
Even now when I'm working remotely, most of the time I have so many meetings and collaborations
with other developers and I don't ever feel not part of my team, even if I don't see them
because we interact so much.
Sometimes they sit on a completely different continent and it still feels very close and
we do love and we don't only pair code, but we like, yeah, you get to know them well.
And it's lots of fun, interesting people that are not the stereotype of coders at all.
Yeah, absolutely.
I bring that up because I think some people listening might be attracted to the show who
don't necessarily work as programmers themselves.
I can recommend it a lot.
I think it's a lot of fun.
Absolutely.
All right.
Well, we talked about some of the reasons that we're interested in this, obviously,
but why?
I mean, as people who like programming, we may want to communicate or share that thing
we like with other kids, with our kids and so on.
But I think programming also can stand in for a lot of more traditional things such
as geometry and so on.
I think what I like most about it is that you can really make things.
You can see them come alive and it can be a game, it can be something more math related,
it could be music, websites.
You can just create anything that you're interested in and even have so much fun seeing it come
to life.
So it's not just learning a skill, maybe for a job or your life at home or your hobbies,
but it's more of like being able to create anything that you're interested in.
And then, of course, you have the obvious advantages like the career opportunities and
lots of skills that are taught by learning how to code that you do not think about in
the beginning, I guess.
Yeah, absolutely.
The realism or I've created something I can see even though it's still digital and virtual
and you can't actually touch it usually unless it's like robotic or something.
But that's so much more realistic and interactive than things like, oh, you're going to learn
these axioms and then we're going to teach you how to prove stuff about angles and triangles
with these axioms.
It's going to teach you logical thinking.
So sit down for the year and we're going to talk about small angles, big angles, diagonal,
cross connected, all that kind of stuff, right?
Which is a little bit useful, but being able to work with computers is way more.
And I think it teaches these problem solving and computational thinking skills at least
as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
And especially what you said, like problem solving, logical thinking that kids, like
not only adults, but kids especially, they understand that you might have a complex problem
you want to solve, but you can break it down into simpler steps, like what an algorithm
is actually doing, giving you a step by step path to reaching a goal.
You can teach that not only by coding also, of course, by just playing and seeing you
want to build this huge Lego piece, but you start building it with little pieces and put
it all together.
And that's also what you have in coding.
You want to reach a goal, you want to program a game or maybe create an animation and you
understand how to break it down.
It helps us or also kids to make more structured decisions.
I think that's a very valuable skill to learn, not only for coding, but for everyday life,
I guess.
Being able to break problems down and solve them.
It helps.
That's like adulthood right there.
What I also find really helpful is one of the skills I looked at specifically is perseverance.
Also for kids, they get frustrated so easily and give up and say like, "This is not working.
I don't like this.
I hate this."
And start throwing their toys around.
At least we are at this stage.
Your kids are probably not doing that anymore.
But yeah, I think with coding, when you encourage them to keep going, even or especially when
they fail, that they understand that failure isn't something bad, but rather it keeps you
improving.
It keeps you going and that you can learn to see challenges or problems at something
positive and something you can grow with.
I think that's really, really great about coding because you will have that a lot when
you learn how to code.
Yeah, I absolutely agree with you.
In the problem, this perseverance skill is incredibly important.
I agree.
It manifests itself a little bit differently as they get older.
Instead of going, "I dislike this.
These are those toys.
Crap.
I'm not good at this thing," or whatever, it's more, "I can't do this.
I'm not good at this."
And a really important skill, I think, is not, "I can't do this.
I need to work at being good at this."
And that perseverance that you learn.
Honestly, I think one of the very most important skills that people can have as a programmer
or in software development in general is perseverance.
Like, "Doesn't work.
I read the docs.
Still doesn't work.
I read Stack Overflow.
People were mean.
Still didn't help me.
I worked my way.
And now it works."
And it's such a cool feeling to work through those things.
But until you learn the perseverance, you just think, "Well, I wasn't good at math.
I must not be good at programming.
I'm out."
Yeah.
I think that keeps a lot of children to learn or to like learning things that are hard.
Lots of kids struggle with math and STEM classes.
But I think it's often because they feel like, "I don't understand this."
Might also not be explained in the best way, but they just shut down and say, "Okay, I'm
just not going to try."
And if you understand, and maybe also I know that there's this huge psychological research
on growth mindset that you understand that you shouldn't praise just an outcome, but
rather the effort that kids try to do something.
They try to improve and put in the work that's just so much more important than reaching
the goal in the end.
We can really help our kids to become more robust and more joyful about learning by teaching
these principles, for example, through learning how to code.
This portion of Talk Python To Me is brought to you by WorkOS.
If you're building a B2B SaaS app, at some point your customers will start asking for
enterprise features like SAML authentication, SCIM provisioning, audit logs, and fine-grained
authorization.
That's where WorkOS comes in with easy-to-use APIs that'll help you ship enterprise features
on day one without slowing down your core product development.
Today, some of the fastest-growing startups in the world are powered by WorkOS, including
ones you probably know like Perplexity, Vercel, and Webflow.
WorkOS also provides a generous free tier of up to 1 million monthly active users for
AuthKit, making it the perfect authentication layer for growing companies.
It comes standard with useful features like RBAC, MFA, and bot protection.
If you're currently looking to build SSO for your first enterprise customer, you should
consider using WorkOS.
Integrate in minutes and start shipping enterprise plans today.
Just visit Talkbyton.fm/WorkOS.
The link is in your podcast player show notes.
Thank you to WorkOS for supporting the show.
Now you did give this topic as a talk at PyData.
Was that PyData Berlin?
Or was it?
I gave it once at PyData London and at PyCon Berlin and at EuroPython.
Okay.
Yeah.
So the reason I was going to bring that up is you had some really cool pictures.
Yeah, I know.
You'd come up with like a little persistent kid working away there and stuff like that,
right?
Oh, I loved them.
I loved creating them.
I used Delhi 3 to create them.
And I spent so much time just playing around with the model and providing it prompts to
see which images I liked best.
Of course, there were the obvious problems with some of them that the kids had six fingers
and so on, but still, it was amazing to create these images.
And I love that like the perseverance one.
And we can link the article to my blog later where you can see the image.
It's just everyone laughs when they see the picture.
Yeah, the pictures are great.
The pictures are great.
All right, let's talk for a minute about brain development and maybe the different stages
that kids go through because there's four or five stages, which then you might map over
to the different types of resources that we're going to talk about.
Yeah, I think that's a really important topic to consider.
If you want to understand when your child is able to do certain things, then you need
to be able to understand how their brain develops because our brain matures over time.
It's not fully mature at birth, but quite the opposite.
And some regions of the brain take more time to develop and some like vision and hearing
are quite well developed already at birth.
So at certain ages, it does make sense to start coding, for example, from zero to four.
And there is not much there for them to really have the cognitive abilities to understand
computational principles or really sit down and concentrate and focus.
Yeah, for example, at birth, you have quite a lot of neurons already, but just 25% of
the adult size brain.
And when you reach the age of four, you already have 80%.
So it has grown a lot through the first four years.
And you do have a lot of influence as a parent or caregiver, friend, whatever.
Mostly the primitive areas of the brain develop first, like hearing, vision, emotional regulation
starts developing, but really cognitive and executive functions like planning and so on
come later.
So I guess zero to four years would be, or birth would be the first stage.
And then zero to four years where you have lots of things happening and you can influence
that by positive influences from like responsive caregiving, that you have diverse learning
experiences and playing with a child.
And then at four years, it starts getting interesting.
And that's also where you can start doing things with your kid.
Like, do you want to rather talk about the development first and then about...
Maybe we should talk about the resources that go with each stage.
What do you think?
Yeah.
Yeah, let's do that.
So yeah, I do too.
Since we already reached age four now.
Oh yeah, nice.
Yeah.
So at age four, you can teach basic algorithmic thinking.
And you can ask questions like, what would you do to guide a lost puppy home?
Just making them start to think about how to break down problems into smaller steps.
But also they have the motor skills at that age and the perceptual abilities to interact
with simple toys that teach the basics of coding.
And you open the BeeBot, which is a tiny floor robot, or I guess it's not so tiny.
It's a bee and it has four directions to go front, back, right, left.
I think it can remember up to 130 commands and you can press go and program the way it's
supposed to crawl or walk, however you want to phrase it.
Yeah.
So one thing you might do with this thing is...
So this is a little robot that has wheels.
It looks like a bee.
What you do is you push the buttons like forward, forward, right, forward, left, forward, forward.
And you might put out something on the ground, like a little...
Can you make your bee go around this thing and then through this little gate or whatever?
Right?
Those kinds of challenges.
I think even when you purchase them, you can purchase rucks that have certain paths on
them and so on.
I guess it's a very...
Right.
You can spend a lot of money on these kinds of toys.
But maybe as a side note, if you start looking, you will find tons of robots in different
price ranges.
So I guess we will only mention examples, but if you start looking, you will definitely
find lots of different options.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Would you say that this RoboTurtles game falls into the same category or is that a little
bit older?
Oh, I'm not sure from the top of my head if it's older.
What I like about it is that it's a board game.
So I'm always asked about screen-free offers.
So something that you can play without sitting in front of the laptop because screen time
is just a general huge discussion point.
I would have to look up.
So if I...
Yeah.
Looking at the box here, it says ages four and up.
So probably.
Oh, nice.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
So this one is...
I think it's almost exactly the same problem.
There is a little bit more to it because there's a couple of challenges in the board game.
So I think we actually have this board game from when my daughter was young.
And you have a little turtle, which is a card and a board, and you can put stuff on the
board like little rocks.
It can't go through.
Maybe there's like an ice wall and it has ability to melt the ice, but it has to do
that before it can move forward.
You get a bunch of cards and you put them in a stack and then you play them out to see
if your turtle wins the game or something like that.
So this is another pretty good option at that age, especially if you want something not
electronic.
What I also like about it is that it becomes a family activity that you learn.
That's just in general a very good thing if you want to teach your kids how to code, that
you make learning a fun activity and playing games, being with them, showing interest and
yeah, having fun doing it as part of gaming or what you do at home, playing board games.
That's just a very easy way then to get started and to get them interested.
I should point out like the actual Robot Turtles website has a bad SSL certificate right now.
So I'm sure you can find it on like Amazon and other places, but it's...
Yeah, I'm sure.
Okay.
So what else?
Another one you talked about is cubelets, but this feels like this might be a little
bit older.
Cubelets, it's, well, you can start early with them, but you can also use them at a
later stage because you can program them using visual coding languages or one of them may
code, but you can start quite early.
These like cubelets are small physical blocks.
As you can see there that you just plug together and some of them move, some have cameras or
sensors, and you can build lots of cool, unique robots with them.
And if you start looking at demos on YouTube, it's really amazing how cool they can look,
the end robot.
I think one disadvantage of this is that it's quite expensive.
So one of these blocks is about 50 euros or maybe $45, $50.
So if you want to build big robots and have lots of options, then you need to invest quite
a bit of money.
Yeah.
I like that the website says free shipping on orders over 50.
It's like, okay, pretty much anything.
Yeah, I guess.
But I still, I love it because it makes you like be creative, especially having this aspect
that you can program them later on using Mako.
That's one of the visual programming language.
I think that's the run for Microsoft.
You can keep using them over a long period of time.
Yeah.
For maybe a mental model for people who haven't seen these in action, because even looking
at the website, you'd have no idea.
What do I do with these things again?
Why are they here?
I feel like they should have people to animation or something, but there's these cubes as the
name would imply, but they're almost like Lego blocks that each block is programmable.
And then you combine them into a thing that does stuff.
Right.
I think you explained it well.
Yeah.
Thanks.
So I think that that's pretty interesting, but this is probably in the next stage, right?
The next stage would be maybe six to nine.
What do you think?
Yeah, exactly.
I think the next stage regarding development would be around six to nine.
Of course, you also always have to mention it's this is now for normally developing children.
It's just an average, every child is different.
So if you observe your child, you know, which skills develop at what point and what might
be easier for them, what is harder.
So this is not like hard ranges, but yeah, if you start with about six years of age,
you can start using visual programming tools because kids become used to using technology.
They have a better hand-eye coordination.
And also one very important part of the brain, the prefrontal cortex, it's like the CEO of
our brain, has a big growth spurt between five and eight.
And this improves working memory, planning, attention, and all kinds of mechanisms that
you need to start really sitting down and code.
And you already opened Scratch Junior.
Yeah, and Scratch Junior is, I think Scratch is quite popular, one of the most popular
visual coding languages.
And Scratch Junior is just a simplified version of it for very young children starting at
five to seven is recommended on their website.
So it has no text, but rather actions like movement.
In visual programming in general, you have puzzle pieces to represent concepts like loops
usually, or I don't know, variables, logical expressions, and you can plug them together.
So you don't have to worry about syntax or using the command line.
You just create these programs by putting together puzzle pieces.
And that happens on a visual interface.
So that's what visual programming is about.
And Scratch Junior is just a very simple version.
I think it's just a free app.
You can play on tablet and create little programs where the characters move around and do
things.
Kind of like the Bee, but you look a little closer to real programming, but then you see
the output, right?
Yeah.
And you start really using, I guess, these plug-in principles that you have the blocks
that you put together.
So when you go on to, for example, Scratch or another of the visual programming languages,
you're already, you have knowledge about how it works in general, I guess.
As I look at this website, I was thinking, you know, when I think about coding, I think
about computers, Mac, Windows, whatever with apps, but obviously young kids are way more
in tune with touch devices like iPads and Android tablets and stuff, right?
It's amazing how quickly they adapt and learn it.
I think it's quite, sometimes I'm blown away by how young children can already understand
how to swipe and select stuff on a touch screen.
I think actually it probably lowers the age by quite a bit that kids are able to do this
kind of stuff because these touch interfaces exist in decent ways.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just learning how to type is actually one of the main reasons why you can only start
with textual programming later because typing is hard.
You need to learn how to do it.
Just touching and dragging and dropping is much easier.
When my older kids were very young, we wanted to have them work with things like this and
just learn how these computers, and they, this predated the iPhone.
Like it didn't exist.
There was no meaningful touch screens that really you would want to use.
And so we got like, kind of like you get a typing program to learn to touch type.
We got a mousing program and there was like a little airplane and they had to like chase
the airplane around with the mouse to learn how the eye hand coordination of mouse and
then like screen, right?
When you're three or four years old, like that's not natural, right?
But touching, oh, they already be all over that.
I think sometimes it's even too intuitive for them that it starts having, like having
a very huge influence on them way too early.
But I guess that's a different discussion.
Yeah, that's a different problem.
That sends you back to a robot turtle board game.
Yeah, exactly.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by us.
I mentioned at the top of the show that we have a wide range of courses focusing on core
topics, such as getting started with Python and advanced ones like APIs, async programming
and deep diving into Python's memory management and more.
But did you know that we have a set of world class apps that you can use in addition to
our web platform for taking our courses?
If you're using a tablet or even a phone, apps are clearly the best option.
But there are other reasons to check them out as well at talkpython.fm/apps.
Our mobile apps offer offline playback, which allows you to download portions or even complete
courses.
We hear from users who learn on the way to work on the subway where connectivity is tricky,
as well as to those who have secure environments that don't allow them to connect personal
devices or which have limited connectivity.
And even though I've done a ton of work to make our video delivery excellent, no matter
your location in the world, there are still places with very slow internet.
Downloading a course and then watching it without pauses is a really great use case
as well.
The app is 100% free and it includes eight free courses that are a single tap away.
So give it a try at talkpython.fm/apps.
Now back to the show.
A little bit later, we could do...
Once you start doing this, some kind of programming language, then that opens up a bunch of resources,
right?
So obviously Scratch is sort of the way more full featured version of Scratch and Junior.
That's pretty neat.
Yeah, I think Scratch is amazing because it...
I think for kids, it's great.
I know lots of adults that still use it for some projects where you really want to make
it come alive because Scratch is focused on having really cool, interactive, fun projects.
They have sounds, music, you can add graphics and it just offers a lot of functionality
to create your project, share them with friends.
And there is a ton of resources on learning Scratch.
And as you can see here, make music, create a story, create a character.
I guess your possibilities are endless.
Yeah, it looks really...
Actually, I didn't realize all the stuff they got going here.
They have a bunch of tutorials, free coding community.
It's super cool.
Then I guess while we're talking on these visual programming languages, we could talk
about Blockly, right?
Yeah, when I knew Blockly existed, it was also free.
Like Scratch is also free.
I guess that's important to mention.
And Blockly is actually at the basis of most of the other visual languages.
For example, it is actually like block-based languages like Scratch and MakeCode are based
on Blockly.
Blockly is developed by Google.
And with Blockly, I think it's for a bit older kids because it's more low level.
If you can say that, it offers you more flexibility.
You see the code next to the blocks.
You see it in an editor, how it actually looks like.
And you could copy paste the code into a normal editor and run it.
It's more low level, but also somewhat more sophisticated, the editor that you have it
more, it looks more like coding to me than Scratch.
Maybe the way to think about it, you say it's more low level.
I would say each block almost corresponds to a single symbol of code, almost, right?
Like you have a set variable too, then you put another block on, which is the value.
And then, you know, you've got your visual editor, but then side by side, you have your
JavaScript or I imagine you could probably see Python or other languages if you, there's
a dropdown for choosing the output language.
Yeah, you can use JavaScript, Python, PHP, Lua or Dart.
Yeah.
So that's kind of getting a little farther up there.
And maybe we could talk a bit about the hardware side, because that's one way that it actually
can be something you can touch and feel.
And as you interact with these ideas, right?
I know that that's nothing I ever used, but my brother started using it.
Like I know that he bought a Raspberry Pi.
You open up the micro bit, which is like a smaller programmable device.
And the Raspberry Pi would be like full-fledged computer in a tiny device.
But yeah, you can learn a lot about hardware and also coding by having such devices.
And the micro bit has displays, buttons, sensors, and you can program it using make code, one
of the other visual programming languages.
And I think it's quite cheap compared to other devices.
Like a Raspberry Pi is, I think it's not expensive for having all these abilities or these capabilities,
but the micro bit is, I guess, more affordable for lots of people.
Oh yeah, nice.
There you can see how it works.
And you know what's really interesting is if you go to makecode.microbit.org,
even if you don't have one of these devices, it comes with a little emulator and then it has
a virtual micro bit that you can write code against.
And it gives you an option as well to choose Python or Blockly or some other way of working
with it, which is pretty cool.
Exactly.
That's also why it's recommended for children, like officially it's recommended for children
at the age of eight or older.
And Blockly, I think is even recommended for kids starting at 10, whereas Scratch is for
even younger children, right?
They say you can get started at eight and they say what I think, which is funny, they say it's
up to 16, which doesn't make sense to me.
Why would there be an upper limit?
But yeah, anyway, you can still use it.
You're 17, you have to do C++ now.
Yes, exactly.
What is great about visual programming is that you can always come back to it.
It's not that you progress from these robots to visual programming to textual programming,
but you can use visual programming for doing, I don't know, digital stories and you can still
do textual programming at work.
It's just having all these options now is really nice.
Yeah, absolutely.
Let's see.
We also have Zoomie.
Zoomie is pretty cool.
Let's come back to Zoomie.
I do want to talk about something that's like a little bit more real similar to the micro
bit first is many of the things over at Adafruit.
Are you a fan of Adafruit?
I don't know Adafruit.
Tell me about it.
So this is a company that creates a whole bunch of small devices like the BBC micro bit that
runs CircuitPython.
There's just tons and tons of things you can buy.
You can buy little sensors and you can buy little displays or whatever it is that you're
looking for.
There's just many, many little ways to make these projects a little bit more than a micro
bit.
So for example, you could get one of these ESP32 devices, but it has like a little tiny
display on it that you can output your text to and it costs $19.
Which is pretty ridiculous.
And they often come with tutorials on how to do it.
So if you're into this kind of stuff, this is like a perfect place to go.
Also, there's just so much opportunity to learn even for like being the parent.
I would learn so much from doing this.
It would be so valuable to me to learn more about the hardware side of things, especially
because I would never sit down and buy myself a Raspberry Pi.
I don't know why, but I wouldn't do it.
Just don't find the time.
But if I can do it.
You already have a computer and all that.
Yeah.
And if I can do it together with my children, I think that's just amazing.
It's really cool.
And this is just a general thing about learning with kids.
If you learn together with them, they can also be the expert sometimes, which is amazing
for kids.
If they can explain something to you that they understand better, it gives them so much
joy and helps them develop this passion and love for learning.
I think that's a great thing about learning how to code.
That doesn't matter if you are the best coder, but you can just use it as a way to improve
yourself.
Yeah.
And once they get that mastery, they're like, "Oh, now I've gone beyond them."
It's probably a really good feeling.
If my kids want to learn how to code early, like much earlier than myself, they will become
so much better than me so quickly.
Yeah, for sure.
I have one of these little devices here.
You put it in your hand.
It's like certainly smaller than the palm of my hand.
And this thing manages the DNS and ad blocking on my network.
It was like 20 bucks or something.
Yeah.
There's sort of less playful, more interesting.
Also just utilitarian things you can do with these little things.
Yeah, absolutely.
All right.
Back to Zoomy, which is in the same age category, I would say.
This is like around 10 years or so.
Yeah.
But it's more robot-like, right?
Yeah, exactly.
It's a self-driving car kit.
It's a small car and it has so many capabilities.
You can program it using Python and Blockly.
You can even teach it about driving certain ways by providing your own data sets.
So there is a lot of machine learning.
Even you can teach it.
It offers so many opportunities or ways to create projects.
At my company, we have done quite a few workshops with kids with Zoomy and they love doing it.
And adults love doing it too.
Nice.
It's like a self-driving car kit.
So if you wanted to try to, instead of maybe teaching it, you go forward three steps, you
turn right, you go forward two steps, you turn left, you teach it.
If you see a turn left sign, you turn left or something like that, right?
Exactly.
Yeah.
It can really understand or analyze its environment.
Yeah, that's pretty awesome.
Okay.
And you do events with these?
Yes.
That's also maybe advice for people that want to get started.
It's always useful to check out local events that happen at companies that are close to
where you live or universities.
They do offer a lot of free, often offer free workshops for kids where you can sign them
up to learn about robotics or coding.
And it can be like an easy way to get them started if you find it hard to do it yourself.
Yeah.
I think a lot, at least in the US, there's quite a few programs for like summer teen
programs that do either 3D printing or coding with Lego robots or whatever.
So there's a lot of summer camps and that type of thing.
Yeah.
I guess that's very big in the US and Germany.
I think not so much.
Maybe it's growing, but yeah, you can definitely spend a lot of time doing it.
I know that like we at our company, we sometimes offer day workshops where you can just start
getting to know about a topic or just play around with things, becoming kids interested
in the topic in the first place.
Yeah.
That's really neat.
Last in the category of hardware here, you already mentioned it though, is Raspberry
Pi, which I guess is a little closer to just a real computer, right?
Yeah.
It's a really powerful device.
So it's basically a very small and cheap computer that runs Linux, but you can use it to learn
coding, but you can also build hardware projects with it, do home automation, learn about the
Internet of Things.
But it's recommended for kids starting at 11 years, so quite a bit older because you
need programming.
This maybe also shifts over to the next age range, namely when your kids have typing skills
and also a more well-developed cognitive abilities and the prefrontal cortex, which I talked
about the CEO of the brain, the development starts to mature and stabilize.
So planning, organizing, thinking abstractly, all these skills become more fully developed
and you of course need the typing skills to get started with textual coding.
So at the age nine plus, most of the time you can get started with these things.
For example, with like programming Raspberry Pi or just more traditional textual programming
languages.
The typing skills is pretty interesting, I think.
One that you talked about before, but I think is also super interesting as a gateway to
this.
This is the best one that I know, maybe people know of others as well, is Code Combat.
You did a podcast episode on that years ago, right?
This is one of the ones, like my daughter and I both subscribed to this for a while
when she was younger.
We'd go through and we did, I can't remember, I think she did 30 or 40 code challenges
through there or something like that, which was pretty awesome.
And I also had the guys on the show.
Yeah, it's been a little while.
Yeah, it has been, but it's still, I think it's an amazing resource.
So Code Combat is about learning how to code through gaming.
So you play a game from beginning to end.
And while you play the game, you learn to code in Python or JavaScript.
I think there are several languages, but you really do textual programming.
And if your kid likes gaming or this is something that makes it easier for them to get started
with coding, it's an amazing resource, even though you have to pay for it because you're
really guided through the course.
You can have lessons.
You can even have, I think, teacher lessons once or twice a week, dependent on your subscription
plan.
Yeah, I think there might be a free tier if you tell it you're a student, but you can
only do certain challenges.
Like, for example, see this, there's like a locks here and it says, I think, yeah, I
have to subscribe to this if I want to do all, if I want to solve all the puzzles, but
there's some of them that you can do for free, I believe.
I don't feel like we had to pay at the beginning, but they could have changed the model.
I also played around with it.
At least in the beginning, you can try it out for free.
What I really like about this, you know, so if you click on, if you go to this, you click
on one of the things it says for this challenge, you're going to learn arguments and syntax.
Or if you come over here and you click on this one, you'll say you'll learn while loops
or whatever.
But then it gives you just a nice, simple challenge.
So, but what's cool, oh, no, in order to play that one, I got to, can I play this one?
Yeah, here you go.
So you have this character and what's, oh my gosh, it made that very large.
What's really cool though, is when you, it gives you a little hint, but the editor, here's
what I think is special about Code Combat.
The editor is auto-complete like you have never seen, you know what I mean?
So it says, all right, what you need to do is build a fence and you have a hero and the
hero has the ability to say, build at X, Y position, or it could move.
And if I just type the letter D, it'll auto-complete like hero.movedown.
Or if I say hero build X, Y, it automatically puts in all the, it's, so if you can type
just a couple of characters, it'll keep the syntax, you know, like the spacing for indentation
and block definitions and all of that kind of stuff is ridiculous for how you don't even
have to really have the right syntax.
You just have to put a little bit of some kind of word in there at all.
And it'll, it'll start to write all of it for you, which I think that's the magic here.
It's nice that you have this insider knowledge by having tried it out yourself for quite
a while.
Yeah, it worked way better than other stuff when my daughter was young and I was trying
to teach her like beyond the visual programming things, but it's, it's so forgiving compared
to, well, here's your favorite editor and you start typing, oh, why won't it run?
There's three spaces, not four.
Oh, I see.
You know, all that kind of detail you got to normally deal with.
It can be so frustrating in the beginning if you need to learn about everything at the
same time, like syntax, spacing, brackets.
It's just a lot to learn in the beginning if you just want to understand the basic concept
like for a start.
Yeah, absolutely.
Another thing you put out there was CodeClub.
Yeah, that's, I think a really cool resource by the Raspberry Pi Foundation.
So it's a platform and it guides your kids from lesson to lesson.
So you start with learning Scratch, but then it progresses onto Python.
And yeah, you can start, I think at the age of eight, yeah, you can start at the age of
eight, which is also the recommended age for Scratch.
And this is just an example for a full platform that you can use to guide yourself or your
children through progressing from one thing to the other.
And I think it's also free.
So if you start looking, there are lots of online coding classes that you can use that
teach you different things and have a whole program and sets of ideas behind how to approach
different topics.
Yeah, this looks very fun.
And the example, at least they have on the screen is using Blockly, right?
Or Scratch, one of them.
I think it's Scratch.
Yeah, I think level one is Scratch and then level two would be Python and more comes after
that.
Yeah, that's really cool.
Another one in this realm is Hetty.
I had not heard of Hetty.
Yeah, me neither.
Just when I started researching the topic, why I chose it as an example is that I just
like the concept of gradual programming.
So gradual programming means that what I just mentioned, basically, that if you learn language
speaking or like a programming language, you have to learn a lot at the same time.
It can be overwhelming.
You have concepts like loops, if else, and syntax like quotation marks, round brackets.
And in Hetty, it's free.
Like it's a web-based interface and you concepts are introduced with as little syntax and then
refined.
So in the beginning, you can just type print and the text and you don't have to worry about
quotation marks or brackets.
It's just introduced at a later stage.
So it mimics the way in which we would learn a language.
And in the end, you like it's based on Python.
So you learn a subset of Python, not the entire programming language, but it's syntactically
valid and you have all the right syntax.
But for some kids, it might be easier to get started with having not everything like being
part of what you have to code yourself.
Right.
Like learning, oh, whoops, you forgot to close the parentheses.
So it's not going to run or you forgot to close the quote.
So it won't work.
Something like that.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Kids run into that all the time because they're like, well, I see the words on the screen
that I wanted to do, but no, no, you got to put it in quotes.
Why?
Oh, and maybe regarding the age, this is recommended for age 10 plus years.
So yeah, when you want to get started with actual textual programming, so it fits into
the third age range that we discussed.
That's pretty much the last limited age range, I guess you would say, before you just go
and do regular programming, right?
Exactly.
From there, you can just progress on to more traditional programming languages.
There are lots of resources like from the Bersperry Pi Foundation.
They have Python courses and there are some on Udemy.
If you start looking, there are tons of resources to get started.
There are lots of online and on-site classes that teach kids starting at various ages.
Yeah, I know about a few German offers where you can really find what you're interested
in, which is really important, like make coding fun and learning fun for kids.
So find out what they are interested in, what their passion is, and then find something
that fits their interest.
I'm sure there's a ton of stuff on YouTube as well to help people, but at least I'm out
of touch.
I bet there's a lot on TikTok, actually.
Oh yeah, I'm out of touch with that as well.
Just, you know, you learn one concept every 30 seconds, you just swipe away until you're
a programmer.
I should actually look at that probably when talking about coding with kids.
I guess that's something that can play a big part.
For sure, Instagram Reels or whatever.
All right, I think that kind of touches on most of the resources that we have.
There's one more I do want to talk about, though, and I think this is probably as good
around, it's beyond the code combat stage where kids can actually use an editor to create
proper, valid syntax, but it's not much beyond that.
And that's Anvil, at anvil.works.
Are you familiar with Anvil?
No.
So I've had, Meredith, the creator of this online and on the show, but what's really
interesting is it's a way to visually build web pages that are actual real web pages that
people can actually, you know, you publish it, your family or your friends could use
it.
So if you wanted to build, you know, something like a Harry Potter type thing and you could
have your friends vote on which one, which character is their favorite or and why or
whatever, you know, like you could build this into a web page and publish it.
And with so many of these projects, it's like, okay, I built this cool thing.
How do I share it?
Or how do I make it look like the thing that I use?
And so you can do this drag and drop, build it out thing.
But then you write the front end, the front end interactive code in Python and true Python,
JavaScript.
And then it has kind of like a simplified database in the back end.
So it has like a little bit of like persistence and storage, but it's, it's really cool.
After we did code combat with my daughter, we went and we did this and she built a bunch
of things that were like, really, she really thought were pretty neat.
She could share with people and have people input little text messages or whatever.
- I love that.
Yeah.
I would learn again.
I know very, I have very little knowledge about web programming.
This would be a good tool for me to get started as well.
- Yeah.
Well, also the problem is even if you're a very good web programmer, it's like, okay,
kid, you go from code combat to now you're doing CSS, HTML, database, you know, like
the, the explosion of complexity to puts, and then you do all that.
And then how do you even put it on the web?
It's just so out of control that step from one to the next.
And so if people want to do anything with like web pages and Python, this is a really
cool option.
I think right here.
- Pretty cool.
Yeah.
And like speaking from your experience, how did you get your kids excited about coding?
Did they just like it or do they hate it?
- My older daughters, they grew up with less technology because they're older.
So at first they weren't super into it, but then they got into college and they had to
start learning things for their degree.
And so now one of my daughters is doing a lot with R, which is fine because she's in
psychology and that's what all of her colleagues are using.
- Which is fine.
It's not ideal, but it's fine.
- It's not ideal.
It's fine.
No, I'm not that district.
No, I'm very proud of her.
I think there's different things that can motivate you.
You know, you can just be curious.
Like my youngest daughter's like, let's play games.
Let's play code combat.
Then she's like, I want to build something for my friend.
You know?
And then so we did this thing with Anvil and she was very motivated, like seek out the
technology and play with it.
Whereas my older daughters, I think they weren't that interested and they had other things
to do, but once they got somewhere with a job or with their education where they needed
it, then all of a sudden it was more interesting.
So, you know, it varies by kid, I think.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And I guess that's fine as well.
Not everyone needs to like coding, but just having the opportunity to learn about it and
experience yourself, if it's something that you're actually like, I was just so blown
away when I experienced how fun it is to learn how to code.
I always thought it was boring and yeah, having all these stereotypes in my head because I
never actually knew anyone that was coding.
- Yeah.
- It's nice that they had the opportunity to learn about it at home.
- Yeah, it absolutely is.
So I think we have a little more follow-up here on the TikTok learning style.
@5fast_tether says, "You can learn every single short, but you won't remember anything as
you flip through them."
(laughing)
Flip, flip, flip, which is probably true.
And then also @Krishan asks, "Do you think Scratch is good to start with for kids?"
Like if you had a kid who was 10, 11, 12, 13, what would you start them with?
- Yeah, I would get started with visual programming.
I think it makes it easier.
I know that for some kids, it can be hard then to progress onto textual programming,
but I guess this is just a general thing.
You need to see what works.
It's not that you, it might be that you start with one thing and you see, actually, it doesn't
work for us.
And then you have to switch tracks and that will happen a lot.
And that's just fine.
You need to find your own path through it.
And don't be afraid to actually make changes if you are not enjoying what, or your kid
is not enjoying their work.
I think visual programming is a great and fun way to get started with coding concepts
and not have it feel like you're actually coding.
- Absolutely.
So @Krishan's child is 13.
I would consider code combat, actually.
I think, you know, 13, you're well enough to do textual stuff if it's not too much drudgery,
right?
Like matching braces and quotes and all that.
So maybe if this kind of thing inspires, maybe that as well.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I think 13 is great for getting started with textual programming as well.
And what is so nice about having large language models now is that lots of these offers are
being translated to various languages and it is becoming much more easy to get started
in your native language, which might not be English.
And then you do not have to learn a language while you learn how to code.
Yeah, that's also, I think, a huge advantage of the current time.
- That's something that's always been interesting to me is so many of the programming languages
are in English, but many of the programmers, their first language is not English.
- Yeah.
- And you know, maybe like your English is perfect, I'm sure, you know,
for a while is no big deal.
But when you're 10 years old, here, you need to learn a program.
Well, by the way, it's in a foreign language.
That's pretty wild, right?
That's gotta be challenging.
What was your, like, how do you feel about this?
I mean, you're more in it than I am.
- Yeah, I would always start, like, if you have the chance, then start in the native
language of the child and you will definitely find good ways to get started and good offers.
For example, Scratch, I think, is available in lots of languages, 70 languages, actually.
Choose something that keeps the cognitive effort that you need to get started with simpler,
because otherwise you really have to learn two things at the same time,
learning a language and learning all these concepts.
And it can then be overwhelming.
- It's not something that I had to deal with, but looking back, I'm like, wow,
I was pretty lucky that I didn't have to learn what all the keywords meant in addition to
just what I was trying to do.
- That's also actually why I decided to study in English, because I knew all the papers I'm
reading are in English, all the code I'm writing is in English.
It doesn't make sense to study it in German.
It's just weird.
- The internet has done some interesting things to just sort of spread everything around globally.
So, all right, Elena, this has been awesome.
A bunch of concrete things for people to take and work with their kids,
maybe if they're grandparents, their grandchildren, or if they're teachers,
or friends, kids, or whatever, right?
- Whatever, yeah.
- Yeah.
How about some final advice to close out the topic?
- Yeah, I think for me, two things are the most important ones, namely, first,
don't force your child to learn how to code, but see if you can find a way that makes it fun for
them. I think making or learning that learning is actually a cool thing, is like it offers you,
or it opens you so many doors in your life that you learn that putting in the effort,
and even if something is complicated, it's worth it.
It's just one of the most valuable skills you can provide your child with.
So, yeah, learning how to learn and how to love learning, I guess.
And there's lots of ways in which you can do it. Choose the right topics, be patient,
sit down with your kids and learn together. Don't force them to sit down for long times,
and like rather distribute learning sessions over time. Don't be afraid to switch tracks.
Lots of the things that apply to adults also apply to children regarding learning.
- Very good advice. I would just maybe re-emphasize that people should reward persistence.
Reward it very, very highly. Like, I can't believe you spent half an hour and you just
got barely got it to print hello, but that's actually a massive accomplishment. And like,
I'm so proud of how hard you focused and worked on it, right? That's a big deal.
- Yeah. That's like, it makes a huge difference to two kids.
- Probably adults as well.
- Yeah, yeah. Everyone. But you lay the foundation for learning, right? So if you...
- Yeah. I mean, that expands on to being good at literature or being good at philosophy or like,
whatever it is that's hard to learn.
- And just believing that you can learn anything.
- Yes, exactly. And the other is to try to capture inspiration. If they're like,
really, really excited and they really want to learn a thing at that moment,
then you could introduce some of these tools. But if they're like,
I want to go outside and play with my friends. You're like, no, come in here,
we're doing coding. Like maybe that's not the moment, yeah?
- Exactly. Yeah.
- All right. Thank you for taking the time to put this all together and coming on the show
and nice to have you back. So.
- Thank you.
- Yeah. Thanks. Bye.
- Bye.
- This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me.
Thank you to our sponsors. Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
This episode is brought to you by WorkOS. If you're building a B2B SaaS app,
at some point, your customers will start asking for enterprise features like
SAML authentication, SCIM provisioning, audit logs, and fine-grained authorization.
WorkOS helps ship enterprise features on day one without slowing down your core product development.
Find out more at talkpython.fm/workos.
Want to level up your Python? We have one of the largest catalogs of Python video courses
over at Talk Python. Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply advanced topics like
memory and async. And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm.
Be sure to subscribe to the show, open your favorite podcast app,
and search for Python. We should be right at the top.
You can also find the iTunes feed at /iTunes, the Google Play feed at /play,
and the direct RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm.
We're live streaming most of our recordings these days. If you want to be part of the show and have
your comments featured on the air, be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel at talkpython.fm/youtube.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Thanks so much for listening. I really appreciate it.
Now get out there and write some Python code.